---
layout: post
title: About this blog
tags: [jekyll, blog, ruby, sass, markdown]
---

It's been a while since I've had a blog, but I thought that it'd be nice to have a place to post projects,
ideas, tutorials, and whatever else is on my mind, programming-related or otherwise.

I've only ever used Blogger before, so this time around, I've decided to do things differently. I wanted a
simple, self-hosted blogging system that would put me in control while still being mostly hassle-free. I think
I've found a winner in Github's own [Jekyll](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll). After starting with
[krisb's Jekyll template](https://github.com/krisb/jekyll-template) and fiddling around for a few hours, I've
found a whole host of things to love about Jekyll:

### Why Use Jekyll?

- It's quick to install with RubyGems: simply `gem install jekyll rdiscount compass` and you're done!
- The domain-specific language for page logic is simple and Rubyesque, and templates can be nested as in Rails.
- I get to write blog posts in Markdown, which is much more convenient than HTML for text-heavy content.
- Thanks to the custom Rakefile included with the template, building and deploying is as simple as `rake deploy`,
  and since the generated site is static, it can be hosted absolutely anywhere, with zero configuration.

Admittedly, I'm not a big fan of the ERB-like layout files and would have preferred for them to be more like
Slim or HAML, but since I imagine Jekyll is designed for rather simple sites, markup-wise, I don't see this
being too much of a problem.

### Jekyll and Subdirectories

A more pressing issue is that Jekyll doesn't seem to allow blogs to exist in subdirectories of a domain. I've
experienced some issues trying to get this blog to run correctly on
_http://alex.nisnevich.com/blog_, because the `{ { post.url } }` values all treat
_http://alex.nisnevich.com_ as the root.

A temporary solution for me has been to replace all instances of `{ { post.url } }` with `/blog{ { post.url } }`.
This works remotely, but breaks the site locally, because running `jekyll --server` will still try to serve the
blog at _localhost:4000_ rather than _localhost:4000/blog_ .

I managed to circumvent this in the Rakefile via a rather hackish solution - an automatically generated symlink:

{% highlight ruby %}
# (make_symlink is called from the build task)
@dir = 'blog'
def make_symlink
  sh 'cd _site && sudo ln -s . ' + @dir
end
{% endhighlight %}

Now `_site/blog` always points to `_site` locally, and all is well.

Well, not really. This is still an ugly hack, and I'd like to look into more long-term solutions - perhaps I should give
[Octopress](http://octopress.org/) a shot.

### All in All

Aside from the subdirectory issue, Jekyll does succeed in minimizing unnecessary distractions and letting me focus
on what I'm here for: the actual post content. Now all that's left is for me to actually come up with that.
