---
layout: post
title: Reading List - 2022
tags: [personal, books, reading list]
---

This was an unusually hectic year, so this set of reviews will be briefer than usual. Flash reviews, if you will.

### ★★★★½

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Independent People</i> – Halldór Laxness [tr. Brad Leithauser]</div>
Perhaps the whole of the human experience is contained within this epic about a small-time farmer's rise and fall, brimming with wit and tragedy.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Embassytown</i> – China Mieville</div>
The perfect novel about language and language contact, though it's so much more than just that – one of the most inventive pieces of sci-fi I've ever read.

### ★★★★

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Imbibe! [revised edition]</i> – David Wondrich</div>
Wondrich's meticulous research and engaging writing take what could be a dull subject – 19th-century cocktail recipes – and make it immensely satifying to read about.<br /> <i>Note: I've started a project to recreate each drink in the book, as close to the original recipe as possible, though <a href="https://instagram.com/aleximbibes" target="_blank">I haven't gotten very far yet</a>.</i>

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Debt: The First 5000 Years</i> – David Graeber</div>
I'm not sure if I am fully convinced of Graeber's theory of debt preceding money and the constant realignment between the two, but this is a fascinating read regardless, with the earliest sections, on social currencies and "everyday communism", being the most thought-provoking.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Shaman's Coat</i> – Anna Reid</div>
I'm a sucker for all things North Asia, so how could I resist Reid's account of her travels in early 2000s Siberia in search of extant shamanic customs? The history aspect of it is definitely no match for Forsyth's magisterial <i>A History of the Peoples of Siberia</i>, but the personal travelogue is an engaging read.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>How to Do Nothing</i> – Jenny Odell</div>
The anti-self-help self-help book, _How to Do Nothing_ is a manifesto for regaining attention in an age of addictive technology, and manages to be both beautifully written and full of actionable ideas.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Chukchi Bible</i> – Rytgėv (Yuri Rytkheu) [tr. Ilona Yazhbin Chavasse]</div>
Part mythology, part poetic ethnography, part adventure story, part family lore, The Chukchi Bible is a mysterious and beautifully written ode to a fading culture.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Dispossessed</i> – Ursula K. Le Guin</div>
I don't know why it's taken me this long to read this classic of science fiction, with an extraordinary portrayal of an anarchist "ambiguous utopia". I just wish the whole thing didn't unravel with an unsatisfying <i>deus ex machina</i> ending.

### ★★★½

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Why Fish Don't Exist</i> – Lulu Miller</div>
Without spoiling too much, I will say that this is a brilliantly written account of one man's quixotic scientific journey and the lengths that he would go to to achieve his vision, interspersed with a touching personal memoir.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Sippin' Safari [10th anniversary edition]</i> – Jeff "Beachbum" Berry</div>
What Wondrich does for classic American cocktails, Berry does for tiki. _Sippin' Safari_ is a fun romp through the world of tropical drinks, but I found the structure of it to be a little unfocused, lacking a clear through-line.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Telluria</i> – Vladimir Sorokin [tr. Max Lawton]</div>
A kaleidoscopic collection of 50 linked micro-stories, all set in a bizarre future of feudal states, human-animal hybrids and super-drugs. I have to give Sorokin credit for his profoundly imaginative world-building, but each chapter being told from a completely new perspective robs it of any sense of real narrative progression.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>A Sociolinguistic History of Scotland</i> – Robert McColl Millar</div>
An expertly written work of sociolinguistics that crams centuries of history of usage of Scotland's two autochtonous languages – Scots and Gaelic – into a slender tome, ultimately striking a critical yet hopeful tone about the prospect of preserving Scotland's linguistic heritage.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Language and Symbolic Systems</i> – Yuen Ren Chao</div>
Why read a 60s linguistics textbook? In part because Chao, a pioneer of Chinese linguistics, writes in beautifully fluid and conversational way, and in part because this book reflects his own interests more than anything else, and so features incredibly forward-thinking chapters on sociolinguistics, information theory, and even language technology.

### ★★★

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Elements of Clojure</i> – Zachary Tellman</div>
Unfortunately the more Clojure-heavy parts of the book were lost on me (it's been a while), but I particularly enjoyed the Names chapter, a deep and philosophically interesting exploration of naming in software.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Truth and Other Stories </i> – Stanislaw Lem [tr. Antonia Lloyd-Jones]</div>
This collection of previously-untranslated stories by Lem was hit-and-miss. Highlights: "Invasion from Aldebaran", "The Friend", "The Hammer", "One Hundred and Thirty-Seven Seconds" (the latter particular timely in the age of GPT-3...) .

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Winter Queen</i> – Boris Akunin [tr. Andrew Bromfield]</div>
A page-turner of a historical mystery-thriller that somehow just doesn't feel satisfying at the end.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>Here I Am</i> – Jonathan Safran Foer</div>
Safran Foer's trademark wit is still there, but it just didn't hit me emotionally the way his first two novels did.

<div style="font-size: 1.1em;"><i>The Routledge Handbook of Language Revitalization</i> – ed. Leanne Hinton, Leena Huss and Gerald Roche</div>
What it says on the tin. Part 1 is mostly theoretical essays about topics in language revitalization. Part 2, which I personally found more interestings, consists of myriad case studies from around the world.
